

Among the surviving manuscripts of the Iliad, the Venetus A is one of the most prominent. Chiefly, Dindorf lays out that no other manuscript contains the critical signs of Aristarchus as well as the sheer abundance of scholia from the four grammarians: Aristonicus, Didymus, Nicanor, and Herodean.

In terms of how the manuscript was physically put together, the manuscript consists of vellum folii arranged into quires of four folii. Since each folio has two sides which can be written on, a right (recto) and left (verso), each quire consists of eight manuscript pages. These quires were then put together to form the completed manuscript. The exception to this rule is the last quire which only contains two folii.

Dindorf considers the majority of the Venetus A’s three hundred twenty-seven pages  to be from the eleventh century, though nineteen folii of the original manuscript fell out and were replaced at a later date. All these replacement folii provide Iliad text such that the manuscript tells the complete narrative of the Iliad, but do not include scholia or critical marks. 

Furthermore there are a number of folii prior to the beginning of the Iliad on folio 12 which either contain nothing or pictorial representations of Iliadic scenes. Among the things included in the manuscript prior to the Iliad are fragments of Proclus’s Chrestomathy and Aristonicus’s On the Signs of Aristarchus. 

Once the manuscript begins to record the main text of the Iliad on folio 12, it becomes fairly routine in its formatting. Typically, a page of Iliadic text contains twenty-five lines of the Iliad, and then is surrounding by various scholia, or scholarly footnotes. Most prominent among the scholia are the main scholia, or what Dindorf calls “marginal” scholia. All of the main scholia seem to be written by the same hand with few exceptions. An identical subscription at the end of each book details the origin of these scholia, specifically naming the works of Aristonicus, Didymus, Herodian, and Nicanor. 

In between the marginal scholia and the Iliad text are, what Dindorf calls, intermarginal scholia. Dinodorf considers the majority of these inter marginal scholia to be excerpts from Aristonicus and Didymus, especially when the scholiast must explain the readings of Aristarchus and Zenodotus, who had made previous editions of the Iliad in the third and second centuries BCE. Many intermarginal scholia contains the same or nearly the same words as the main marginal scholia, making these inter marginal scholia just seem to be redacted versions of the main scholia. Still, not every main scholia that discusses Zenodotus or Aristarchus has a corresponding intermarginal scholia. Additionally, while it seems plausible to read the intermarginal scholia as just abbreviated summations of the main scholia, there are many intermarginal scholia which do not correspond to anything in the main scholia. From this, Dindorf concludes that the two types of scholia, main marginal and intermarginal, must come from different, albeit similar, sources.

Dindorf recognizes other types of intermarginal scholia which also seem to take the same or very similar words from the main marginal scholia. These are the scholia which deal with grammar as well as the more explanatory scholia. About these, Dindorf concludes that both the marignal and intermarginal grammatical and explanatory scholia are of the same type and origin, and that they only differ to the extent that one contains more or less excerpts from separate, but very similar, sources. Dindorf makes sure to keep the marginal and intermarginal scholia separate, even if very similar, and simply marks with an asterisk those scholia which are very similar.

In terms of other scholia, there are scholia which appear between the lines of Iliad text and provide glosses for the Iliadic vocabulary. These interlinear glosses mostly appear directly above the word which they gloss, though sometimes they run into the intermarginal space. These glosses are most frequent in the first two books of the Iliad, and become much less frequent as the manuscript continues.

Another type of intermarginal scholia deals with different readings of the Iliad text, generally introduced with a formulaic phrase like ἐν ἄλλῳ, γράφεται, γράφεται καί, etc. These differences in reading can refer to legitimate multiforms of the Iliad text, but very many, according to Dindorf, are simply mistakes in previous manuscripts which the scholiast lists to show how he has has corrected them. Changes of the manuscripts text that have more significance are denoted with the adverb διχῶς, and in general this marker is used to denote that there exists a departure from the edition of Aristarchus.

In terms of orthography, the spelling and syntax of the scholia match that of the main Iliad text, though the scholia have more errors than the text.

Returning to the question of the scholia’s origins, Dindorf recalls the subscription mentioned previously which names Aristonicus, Didymus, Nicanor, and Herodean as the sources for the scholia. Dindorf reasons that since the works of these four scholars were destroyed long before the Venetus A was composed, this subscription must have been preserved from much older manuscripts. Despite the fact that no reason is ever given as to why the changes were made to that original collection of Homeric scholia, these scholia largely remained unchanged resulting in the same marks being exhibited on the pages of the Venetus A centuries later. For it is not by chance that the scholia of the Venetus A, written so much after Didymus and Aristonicus, still give priority to the things that those two say about Aristarchus, Zenodotus, and Aristophanes. Dindorf further argues that this can also be demonstrated clearly in the interlinear scholia of many Iliad manuscripts contemporaneous to the Venetus A.

Still, like all collections of scholia, both Homeric and non-Homeric, no two collections of scholia are identical. Scribes sometimes make mistakes, are copying from editions which are not perfect to begin with, and make their own additions.

Dindorf quotes a contemporary of his, Lehrsius, in order to expound on this point. Lehrsius explains that the scholia which would become the scholia of the Venetus A probably did originally come from the four scholars mentioned previously: Aristonicus, Didymus, Nicanor, and Herodean. Still, Lehrsius thinks this collection was not kept in a pristine state too long after the time of Herodean. The first person to copy the collection of scholia did their best to copy the collection, but invariably added or changed a few things. The biggest changes to the collection of scholia which would inform the Venetus A come from new Homeric scholarship beyond Herodean, most notably Porphyry. These newer scholarly contributions are present throughout the Venetus A scholia, even if there is not always an attribution provided.

Dindorf notes that the work of Porphyry in particular appaers infrequently in the Venetus A and references to his work seem to have been culled from another source which abbreviated his ideas. Returning to the idea of attribution, Dindorf notes that the scholia of the Venetus A will often discuss a certain line of thinking (ἱστορία), but will only sometimes give an exact attribution as to whom the line of thinking belongs too. Often, the thinking of multiple scholars will be lumped into just one line of  ἱστορία, as if it were just one work being referenced.

Other modern scholars have already done the work of separating out which parts of ἱστορία belong to which ancient scholars. For example, we owe to Aristonicus and Didymus everything that we have about Zenodotus, Aristophanes, and Aristarchus. Still, even though the Venetus A contains a wealth of information about Aristarchus, it never contains more than just excerpts. This not only has to do with epitomists and scribes who made the pared down works which Aristonicus and Didymus excerpted from, but also because those two only ever excerpted from the works of Aristarchus. That is, if Aristonicus and Didymus include an excerpt from Zenodotus, it is only an excerpt which Aristarchus included in his own book, not one from the original Zenodotean source. Thus, in light of the Venetus A's contents, Zenodotus appears to only be someone who offers alternate readings which are illogical and often violate meter. Dindorf hypothesizes that these such excerpts from Zenodotus are absurd, that no scholar of Homer could have believably offered such alternate readings. Rather, Dindorf suggests that these absurd lines from Zenodotus are actually lines from other incorrect manuscripts which Zenodotus had pointed out as errors and corrected for his edition. Finally, although the scholia is more Aristarchean than Zenodotean or Aristophean, one is not able to label every scholia which displays the reasoning of Aristarchus.

Dindorf warns that while Aristarchus is an extraordinary scholar, one should not follow him blindly, as many of his followers did. Many later commentators, including those today, have pointed out many places in which his suggestions are lacking. Many of his errors stem from his ignorance of the letter, digamma, which was not known to Aristarchus or his contemporaries.

As for the critical signs which sit to the left of the main text on the pages of the Venetus A, they are unique to Aristarchus, even though Zenodotus and Aristophanes both had their own signs. The signs of Aristarchus include the obelos, the asterisk, the asterisk-obelos combination, the diple, dotted diple, and antisigma. These critical signs serve as a marker that there is a comment in the scholia about this line. So if a line has a diple in front of it, this essentially means that Aristarchus has something to say about this line. Sometimes the critical sign is repeated at the beginning of the corresponding scholion, but so many have been left out that Dindorf did not consider it worthwhile to recreate them, especially since one cannot always accurately attribute the critical mark to its corresponding scholion. Thus only about 150 occurrences of critical signs before the scholia remain.

In the place of the critical sign, many scholion begin with words like ὅτι, πρός, or δία which refer back to the critical signs. For example, some scholia read διπλῆ παράκειται ὅτι, meaning "the diple is placed to the side because..." More often, the scholion will be abbreviated such that only ὅτι remains, and one must infer that the ὅτι is preceded by some identification of a critical mark. Another way the scholion can reference a critical sign is through the word  σημεῖον, such as τὸ σημεῖον ὅτι, or in a similar phrase using a derivative of σημεῖον. Still, not every use of σημεῖον is connected to critical signs, as it can simply used in the general sense of a sign or a marker.

Other significant markings on the pages of the Venetus A include the end-of-scholion marker (referred to by the HMT project as the "fishtail") and the beginning-of-scholion marker. The end-of-scholion marker occurs routinely, while the beginning-of-scholion marker occurs rather infrequently and only on the first scholion of a page. Finally, it is worth noting that the scholia of the Venetus A have been arranged so precisely that none span across two pages. Every scholion of the Venetus A is contained to just one page of the manuscript, a quality not shared by other manuscripts.

Dindorf continues his preface by detailing the short history of the manuscript since it was written. He notes that even in the fifteenth century CE, the Venetus A was considered a very grand and much prized manuscript. The first manuscript to have excerpted from the Venetus A seems to be a Florentine edition from 1488, now held in the Marciana Library in Venice. Dindorf then cites the work of another scholar, Cobetus, as he details many examples of the small similarities and differences between the scholia of the Venetus A and this Florentine edition. 

Dindorf notes that there is little evidence of the Venetus A's use or mention after this Florentine edition until the edition of Villoison in 1788, though there were a few scholars made but a brief reference to the Venetus A. Villoison's edition consisted of a complete Iliad text, scholia, critical signs, and a scholarly preface, but ultimately was filled with poorly read scholia. His principal errors were that he ommitted many of the scholia and that he misread many of the abbreviations in the scholia he kept. Bekkerus, in a later edition, attempted to fix many of the problems present in Villoison's edition, but he would confuse the abreviations of the individual manuscripts. In Bekkerus's edition of the scholia, the scholia of multiple manuscripts were displayed together, separated only by the abbreviation of the manuscript. Thus, with the abbreviations confused, scholia that were not in the Venetus A were often marked as being in the Venetus A and so on. Dindorf, recognizing the errors of Bekkerus, presents the scholia of the Venetus A as its own distint unit, without the scholia of other manuscripts appearing in this book. He hopes that doing so will imbue his edition with a level of trustworthiness that similar editions of Sophoclean and Aeschylean scholia have. 

The preface ends with a description of how Dindorf went about emending scholia that were damaged, unreadable, or missing. In many cases, Dindorf looked to other manuscripts with identical scholia, especially those that take from the Venetus A, in order to fill in missing words, letters, etc. Still, Dindorf admits that he is aware that this will not always result in a perfect emendation as some later manuscripts will misquote the Venetus A. In other cases, Dindorf looked to the work of other grammarians, but this too carries the same caveat as the later manuscripts. Finally, while Dindorf does look to one compiler of scholia, Eustathius, he ignores others for two reasons. 
