The data here is taken directly from a topic model run by ToPan. In addition to the visualization of the topics (seen [here](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/TopicModelData/ToPanVisualizations) ), ToPan provides data, such as those presented in this folder, which examine the how closely each of the scholia relate to each topic. This is done by assigning each scholion 15 scores, called a theta-score, with each of the 15 scores corresponding to 1 of the 15 topics from the topic model. The theta-score, more specifically, is a measurement of the prevalence of a particular topic in certain scholion. Were a scholion to score a 0.0 with respect to a particular topic, this would indicate that this particular scholion contains no content from that particular topic. Conversely, a score of 1.0 would indicate that the content of this scholion would likely come only from this topic. Since all topic models by definition classify all words of a text into a defined number of topics (here 15), the sum of all 15 theta-scores assigned to a scholion must equal 1.0, since the content of a scholion cannot come from anywhere else but the defined topics.

[MasterThetaTable.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/TopicModelData/ThetaTables/MasterThetaTable.csv) is the complete data table from ToPan, where every single scholion in our dataset is assigned 15 theta-scores, one for each of the topics. The table is arranged so that each row represents a different scholion, and each row has 18 columns. The first three columns contain indentifiers for the scholion, while the latter 15 contain the theta-score associated with each of the 15 topics identified by the ToPan software.

However, since this data table is overwhelming, we found it useful to identify which of the relationship of scholia and topic were actually significant. For the purposes of our research project, we identified a theta-score greater than 0.9 as being "significant." The folder [SignificantThetaScoresByTopic](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/TopicModelData/ThetaTables/SignificantThetaScoresByTopic) contains the results of this analysis. Each data table in that folder presents which scholia had a theta-score greater than 0.9 for a specific topic.
