The data tables here present data relates to how many of the words in the scholia were written in the scribe's voice or not. Put simply, non-scribal voice words are those that are obviously derived from a source other than the scribe's own mind. These incude examples of quoted text, or direct quotations from the *Iliad* or some other text. Non-scribal voice also includes quoted language whcih refers to words that either exist in the Iliad line on which the scholion is commenting or are instances where the scholiast is using a word to refer to the word in its abstract form. Very often this abstract use of language usage occurs when the scholiast is discussing the morphology or etymology of a word.

There are two main histograms of note in this data set. The first is [VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv). This is an seven-column table where the first column simply indentifies which type of scholion's data (main scholia's data, intermarginal's, etc.) will be presented in each row. The second column presents how many scholia were analyzed for each of the type of scholia, while the third column presents the number of words in each of the types of scholia. The fourth through seventh columns present data about how many words within each of the scholia types are classified types of voice. So the fourth column presents how many words were written in scribal voice, the fifth how many were examples of quoted text, the sixth how many were examples of quoted language. The seventh column presents how many were written in non-scribal voice, which is simply the result of adding the fifth and sixth columns together, since they are the two ways non-scribal voice words can be classified. For the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh columns, a percentage is provided along with the number of words just mentioned. This percentage is the percentage of total words in a certain scholia type that are classified by the type of voice specified by the column. So in the fourth column for the main scholia row, the percentage would be reporting what percentage of words in the main scholia are classified as being written in the scribal voice. 

The file [NonScribalVoiceHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/NonScribalVoiceByType.tsv) functions very similarly to [VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv), except this file is only concerned with non-scribal voice. It is a four-column table. The first column, like above, simply identifies the type of scholia which will be analyzed in each row. The second column presents the number of words for each type of scholia which were written in non-scribal voice. The third column presents how many of those non-scribal words are classified as quoted text, while the fourth column presents how many are classified as quoted language. Like [VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv), the third and fourth columns also include a percentage. This percentage is the percentage of total non-scribal words in a certain scholia type which are classified by the type of voice specified by the column. So in the third column for the main scholia row, the percentage would be reporting what percentage of non-scribal words in the main scholia are classified as quoted text. 

The data from [VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/VoiceTypeHistogram.tsv) and [NonScribalVoiceHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/NonScribalVoiceByType.tsv) was then used to look for significant differences in the types of voice used within each type of scholia, since a difference was thought to represent a difference in the function and history of the content within each of the types of scholia. Thus [ZTestScribal.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/ZTestScribal.tsv) and [ZTestNonScribal.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData/ZTestNonScribal.tsv) present the results of two separate Z-tests for proportions. The former test compared the ratio of scribal voice words to non-scribal voice words among all the scholia zones. The latter compared the ratio of quoted text words to quoted language words among all the scholia zones. 
