The data presented here relates to the frequency of personal names appearing within the text of the scholia. It was hoped that by collecting such information, some conclusions could be drawn about the content of the different zones of the scholia.

The [histograms folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes) present data tables which list every personal name that appears within each zone of the zone. So there is one data table for the main scholia, one for the intermarginal scholia, and so on. 

The [differences folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/Difference) contains data tables which, based on data from the [histograms folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes), identify the differences in the presence of personal names between the different types of scholia.

The file [nameByScholiaType.txt](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/nameFreqByScholiaType.txt) is a plain text file that lists every personal name. Then for each name, there is reported that name's frequency within each type of scholia. The frequency is reported as the number of occurrences of that name in each type of scholia as compared to the total number words in that type of scholia.

The file [nameMetrics.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/nameMetrics.csv) presents data bout how often personal names in general appeared within each type of scholia. It is a six column table, where the first column identifies which type of scholia (main, intermarginal, etc.) will be discussed in a particular row. The second column presents the number of unique names appeared in each type of scholia, while the third column presents how many words of the scholia were personal names. In other words, the calculation for the second column is concerned with whether or not "Achilles" appears in the scholia, whereas the calculations for the the third column is concerned with how many times "Achilles" appears. The fourth column then just presents what percentage of the total number of name appearances were unique names. The fifth column presents how many total words, either personal name or not, appeared in each type of scholia. The sixth column, then, presents what percentage of total words were personal names.

The data from [nameMetrics.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/nameMetrics.csv) was then used to look for significant differences in the ratio of personal names to total words, since this was thought to stand in as a marker of the scholia's contents. Thus [nameZTest.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/nameZTest.tsv) presents the results of a Z-test for proportions comparing the ratio of personal name words to total words among the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia.
