Understanding how a text is formatted is absolutely essential to properly understanding the contents of a text. Paragraph breaks and section divisions help to shape a reader's understanding of what is being written. But in the case Venetus A manuscript, a tenth-century C.E. manuscript of the *Iliad*, its format is largely not understood. Each page of the manuscript contains both lines from the poem and scholia, or scholarly footnotes, which surround the text and provide commentary. These scholia are divided into five distinct zones on the manuscript page, but their precise function is never made explicit. This thesis seeks to use apply methods of distant reading in order to form a better understanding of how these five zones interact. Distant reading requires the use of a computer to run broad statistical analyses across the whole corpus of scholia, like topic modelling, as opposed to the more common practice of close reading. This thesis focused mainly on the relationship of three zones of the scholia: the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia. In the end, methods of distant reading were able to demonstrate that these three zones not differed significantly in their content, but also they differed in the style to such an extent that each of these three zones most likely came from its own separate source tradition. Thus, as regards the format of the manuscript, one should never treat these five zones be read as being equivalent, but one should treat each zone as its own separate document with its own purpose, style, and history.
