- Homeric questions / oral theory (Lord, Nagy)
- HMT (Ebbott & Due)
- Venetus A (Dindorf, Due)
- scholia and sources (Dindof)
- Sources (Dickey, Wolf)
- scholia and the page of the MS (Ebbott, Maniaci, Churik, Smith) 
- My question

---

Reading this thesis is more than just becoming more familiar with the *Iliad*, its history of scholarship, and newer developments in the digital era. More generally, reading this thesis begins the process of engaging with a text. Like all texts, this thesis has two primary components: the textual content and its formattting or presentation. While the content should reign as king in an undergraduate research thesis, the formatting is just as important for relaying the information contained within these pages. 

Admittedly, the presentation of my information is not particularly noteworthy, and thus it may appear that claiming my presentation to be as important as my content is a bit far-fetched. On the contrary, my presentation is not noteworthy precisely because I chose to present my content in the exact same way as countless others have before me. That is, I am writing text in a single conlumn that will extend onto many pages whose text will be split up into paragraphs. Overall, most readers probably would never spend more than a few seconds pondering the formatting of this material since it follows the manner of publication that has been the standard for centuries. However, if I chose to write this thesis in two-columns without any paragraph breaks, I should not expect many people to read much beyond the first few lines.

In either case it should be clear that formatting matters when it comes to fashioning an effective text. I raise the reader's attention to the now-standard method of creating books in print precisely because the two texts which lie at the heart of this thesis apply methods of publication which were the standard in their own day, but far different from that of today. On the one hand is the epic poem the *Iliad*. In its modern incarnation, the *Iliad* runs about fifteen thousand lines as a printed text. The *Iliad*, however, was not originally a printed text; rather, its arose out of an oral tradition which dates back nearly three thousand years. 

On the other hand is the tenth-century C.E. Venetus A manuscript which contains one such written version of the *Iliad*, and one which is the oldest complete version in existence. As if its age were not impressive enough, each page of the manuscript is replete with a wealth of scholarly notes, or scholia, which provide a running commentary on the poem. These scholia are split up among five different margins of the manuscript such that they utterly surround the text on each manuscript page. This is a far cry from the modern system of footnoting which relegates similar scholarly notes to the bottom margin of the page, giving the impression that the footnotes are less important than the regular text. On the contrary the scholia of the Venetus A are so all-encompassing that it is hard to view them in the same dismissive light as modern footnotes. 

It is precisely the format of these scholia, their division amongst the various margins of the manuscript page, which will become the focus of this thesis. The overall goal of this research was to use digital technologies to investigate what sort of relationship existed, if any, between a scholion's position within a particular margin and its content. Beyond a curiosity in the creation of this manuscript, this line of inquiry does have broader implications for the field of Homeric studies. More is needed to be saidin this preface about the nature of the Venetus A and its scholia before these implications can be fully understood. For now, however, it is sufficient to say that if it can be shown that particular margins of the manuscript are strongly correlated with particular discussions of Iliadic scholarship, then one might be able to state more definitively what the sources are for the scholia in each particular margin.

Why precisely this inquiry into the sources of the scholia is of any importance is ultimately the purpose of this first chapter. Chapter two will detail the general methodology of how I was able to analyze the corpus of Venetus A scholia, while chapter four will detail more in-depth the actual analysis and initial. Finally, the concluding chapter will contextualize the more significant results from the third chapter and explain how my findings help to shed light on the creation of the Venetus A as well as on the a critical point in the evolution of Homeric poetry.

Before going any further, it is necessary to ground my work in that of previous scholars and to clarify my assumptions towards the figure known as Homer. The common sense opinion was that an ancient Greek known as Homer *wrote* the two seminal epics of the Western literature, the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*. However, the scholarly opinion is much more divided. On the one hand is the opinion put forth by the eminent classical scholar Martin West in his 1998 critical edition of the *Iliad*. For West, the *Iliad*, "was the work of a single poet of the greatest ability" (*unius munus fuit maximi poetae*, v), and it was written (*Ilias... conscripta est*, v).

This opinion is by no means the dominant opinion. As far back as the first centruy C.E. the Jewish historian Josephus makes the claim that the poems were not written down originally but were composed as songs. Over a long span of time these songs were rememembered and eventually written down (Josephus, Against Apion, 1.2). This oral theory took on a whole new life in the late eighteenth century with the writings of Friedrich Wolf. In his 1795 preface to *Iliad*, Wolf not only expands on the theory put forth by Josephus and others, but goes one step further. Wolf suggests boldly that:
      
      ...this entire connected series of the two continuous poems is owed less to genius of him to whom we have normally attributed it, than to the zeal of a more polite age and the collective efforts of many, and that therefore the very songs from which the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* were assembled do not all have one common author... (Wolf, 70)

This is a view which Wolf himself says "one must accept" (70) and which I believe holds greater weight than that of West. Not only does Wolf acknowledge the importance of songs for the creation and spread of the two poems, but he does away with even the idea of a single poet, something which Josephus still seemed to believe existed. For Wolf and for his followers, there is no Homer and there is no single poet. To be fair to West, he acknowledges the key role of song and rhapsodes in proliferating the epic poems (*Ilias materiam continet iamdiu per ora cantorum diffusam*, v), but he diverges most importantly from the view of Wolf and other oral theorists in his assertion that even these songs "first got the form and cohesion as we know them at that time when it was written" by that single poet (v).

The idea that the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* were originially composed as songs for performance is one that has persisted far beyond Wolf. More and more scholars are stating more confidently than Wolf their new evidences which force the figure of "Homer" to yield his genius to a tradition of oral poets. One of the most notable contributions in this respect comes from the collaboration of Milman Parry and Albert Lord in the early twentieth century. The pair studied the living oral poetic tradition of Yugoslovia in order to learn much about the form of living traditional oral poetry so that, when approaching an oral poem like the *Iliad*, one could "work backwards from the form so as to learn how they must have been made" (Lord, 3). The two asserted that this oral poetry of the Slavic people was not simply poetry being read aloud, but rather poetry which was being composed in its performance (Lord, 5). Furthermore, it was based on their comparative study of the nature of the Slavic traditional oral poems and their understanding of the formulaic nature of the Homeric poems that the pair concluded that the Homeric poems are oral poems (Lord, 141).

Regardless of their origin it is plainly obvious that at some point in time the epics were written down. Gregory Nagy laid out his model for the evolution of Homer from an oral composition to the fixed text we have today in his book *Homeric Questions*. In it, Nagy notes that the *Iliad* was probably first beginning to be transcribed sometime during the sixth-century B.C.E., which would be at least a few centuries after the poem was first being composed as a performed oral poem (Nagy, 42). Nagy accounts for Greeks' attribution of the poem to the creative figure known as "Homer" by noting that this would not be the first time the Greeks attributed a large societal achievement to a single "cultural hero," (Nagy, 21). So just as often Greek lawmakers are reconstructed "as the originators of the sum total of customary law as it evolved through time. So also with Homer: he is retrojected as the original genius of epic" (Nagy, 21).

Once the text was written down, it is clear from antiquity that the Homeric poems were well-known, well-respected, and well-read.  The poems were seen as so important that in the third and second centuries B.C.E., three separate heads of the Library at Alexandria took it upon themselves to edit the texts of Homer. So even though the historical figure of Homer and an original written version of the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* never existed, these three ancient editors committed themselves to try and recover a text that was meant by the poet. These Alexandrian editors began a tradition of editing to discover the poet's voice that continues through to today with West's edition of the *Iliad*. Again, it was Wolf's insights into the nature that cast a shadow upon the virtue of such a process. If Homer truly does not exist and the epic poems were composed-in-performance repeatedly by oral poets across Greece for centuries, "what, then, will it mean to restore these poems to their original luster and genuine beauty?" (Wolf, 70). To expand on Wolf's question, how can one represent in a print medium a poem which, by nature of its original continuous composition-in-performance, was subject to variation with every performance.

The answer to these problems of editing the Homeric poems would only come two centuries later with the creation of the Homer Multitext project. Put briefly, one cannot use the medium of print to display the full multivariant nature of the *Iliad* or *Odyssey*. According to the two main editors of the Homer Multitext project, Casey Dué and Mary Ebbott, the key to representing more fully the oral tradition of the Homeric epics is in a digital medium. They write, "The Homeric epics were composed again and again in performance: the digital medium, which can more readily handle multiple texts, is therefore eminently suitable for a critical edition of Homeric poetry — indeed, the fullest realization of a critical edition of Homer may require a digital medium" (1). 

Enter the HMT with its focus on digital editions.

Shifts the focus from recovering Homer to being a documenter of individual manuscripts. 

Venetus A.

