- More specific about what distant reading means
- Overview of Topic Modeling
- Explorations in showing that, at the very least, the zones of scholia are different!

----

The five zones of the Venetus A scholia are patently obvious to any casual onlooker. Beyond their different positioning on the manuscript page, some are written in a different style of handwriting, and the average length of a single scholion differs quite dramatically. An interlinear scholion typically has no more than a few words, while some main scholia take up the entirety of the upper margin. However, it is entirely possible that these differences are coincidental or unimportant. Does it really make a difference that the main scholia and intermarginal scholia differ in handwriting styles (Hecquet, 79-80)? What scholars really want to know is whether the placement of a comment within a particular zone conveys any information, "about the source(s) of the comment" (Ebbott, 2012). Could many intermarginal and interior scholia really just abbreviated versions of main scholia, as Dindof asserts (CITE). And, perhaps more fundamentally, is there any real difference between the intermarginal and interior scholia or is it better to treat them identically? 

These are the sorts questions digital analyses are better suited to answer than Dindorf's nineteenth-century methods. The entirety of the previous chapter was devoted to describing the methods required to prepare a text for analysis beyond the close-reading which dominated literary analysis in the past. After a thorough process of text wrangling, the Homeric scholia can be analyzed with the aid of a computer. It is important to note that, in conjunction with the previous discussion of creating different citable versions of the same text, that this text wrangling is not in any way altering the original archival data from the Homer Multitext. Rather, the process of text wrangling creates a different version of the same text. A completely parsed version of the first main scholion of Book 1 would still be recognizable as the first main scholion of Book 1 and should be cited as such, but it is clearly not the same text. It should be cited as a parsed edition of that scholion. Thus when the various forms of the text were being modified, it was important to always attach some urn identifier to every scholion so that the scholia maintained their identity throughout the process.

As for applying the "distant-reading" described by Jocker's, its implementation takes on multiple forms. On the one hand, some of the points made in this thesis were made simply by taking descriptive statistics about the dataset, e.g. how many times does a particular name appear in the main scholia? While this figure would not be impossible to come up with by hand, it is far easier to accomplish with a computer. Particularly since the goal of this thesis is to understand the differences in purpose between the zones of scholia. So knowing that there are the most occurrences of the name Aristarchus could simply be the result of there being the most words in the main scholia. Thus in order to compare the appearances of Aristarchus in the main and itnermarginal scholia, it is necessary to normalize the frequency by dividing the occurrences of a name's appearance in a zone of scholia by the total number of words within that type of scholia. Whereas finding out how many times Aristarchus appears in the main scholia is a feasible, yet annoying statistic on the magnitude of hundreds, finding out how many words are in the main scholia would be practically infeasible on the magnitude of ten thousands. Thus, even fairly simple inquiries require digital technologies when the corpus becomes large enough as in the case of the Venetus A's scholia.

However, not all inquiries can be approached so easily. When trying to determine whether the textual content among the scholia zones is at all similar, there is no simple calculation that one could work through by hand, especially when the corpus becomes so large. In this case, it was necessary to defer to the algorithms developed by others. For this particular inquiry, topic modelling was used extensively in order to highlight in what ways the content of the scholia was quantitatively different. Specifically, I relied on the Latent Dirichlect Allocation (LDA) model of topic modelling. The proof that LDA works and an explanation of its precise mechanism is far too technical and beyond the scope of this thesis. Here, though, I will provide a general outline of how the model works. Then I will discuss some of the issues trying to work with data from topic modelling and my attempts to mitigate these issues.

The basic assumption behind topic modelling is that any and all texts vary to some degree in their content. Whether a text be a novel, or whether it be a group of historical documents, a text varies in its contents. If there were no variation, it would not be a text but a single word repeated over and over again. So, in a simple example, a work like the *Iliad* contains descriptive passages ranging from a duel, a chariot race, lamentation, arming for battle, insulting, and so on. While such changes in scene are obvious to someone with some reading comprehension skills, it is hard to quantify exactly what makes these various scenes different. Thus topic modelling aims at using digital technologies to identify the different topics which end up contributing to the entirety of the text. So in following with the above example, one running a topic model on sections of the Iliad might expect to find a topic devoted to the language of prayer and another topic devoted to the language of battle. A "topic" is more than just a general label for a section of a text, but practically in topic modelling it refers to a set of vocabulary items that the computer has recognized as frequently occurring together in particular order again and again. In reality, topic modelling assumes that a text is written in a peculiar fashion. The model assumes that an author has at their disposal a number of different "topics," which is just a set of vocabulary, and that the author draws from these various topics in order to compose the final text. Thus, the goal of topic modelling is to uncover these specific "topics." 

This model is designed to overcome the fact that computers do not read like humans. To cite a popular example, the two phrases "time flies like an arrow" and "fruit flies like an apple" would seem nearly identical to a computer which can only recognize if the characters which make up words are equivalent. Thus by treating a potential corpus as just a seemingly random assembly of words, topic modelling is able to identify the reoccurring patterns of cooccurring words which define topics. To reiterate from the previous chapter's discussion of text wrangling, it should be clear now why having a clean corpus of text is necessary for topic modelling. If the modelling relies on the cooccurrence of words, then it is important that the variants forms of a word be reduced into a simplified lemma. Otherwise important lingustic cooccurrences might be left out of the analysis.

Before progressing further in this discussion of topic modelling a final point should be made about the nature of "topics." As stated previously, topics are a set of vocabulary items that an algorithm has identified as constituting a recurring pattern of cooccurring terms. As such, "topics" in their most basic sense, do not have to confer information about subject matter. In some cases, topic modelling can be used to identify differences in an author's style. Thus the "topics" would not be collections of words relating to a particular subject, but rather a collection of words that might give information about a particular author's style.

More about topic modelling, and the problems it poses for replicable and reliable scholarship, will be said when discussing the application of topic modelling to the questions of this thesis. For now, I want to return to the scholia and how forms of simpler implementations of digital technologies can aid in the answering certains questions about the scholia. At the most basic level, this thesis is concerned with observing in what way the zones of scholia are different. So finding fairly basic metrics about the scholia can be helpful, like the average length of a scholion. Even a cursory look at the scholia would yield the conclusion that the main scholia, on average are longer than interlinear scholia. While it is most likely that this difference is due largely to the amount of space available, it is probable that what the scholiast wants to say effects where he will place a comment. The limited space close to the text makes glosses and paraphrases a perfect fit for the interlinear scholia. By contract, the immensity of space and distance from the text makes in-depth conversations about mythology and history a good fit for the main scholia.

Where these observations become less clear is in the interior and intermarginal scholia. For all intents and purposes, these two scholia share the same amount of space on the manuscript page, and to the naked eye, the individual comments tend to be about equal in length. Here, then, is the advanage of digital technologies. The current data from the Homer Multitext archive includes the comletely edited edition of seventeen books from the Venetus A edition of the *Iliad* including all the scholia from that book. The only books missing from this analysis are books 13, 16, and 20-24. Even with an incomplete corpus of scholia, the HMT edition of the scholia includes 148,978 words, which is a sizable enough corpus that members of the HMT feel comfortable asserting that this sample will be representative of the entire corpus of Venetus A scholia. It should be noted that since the scripts which were used to create this data are included in the GitHub repository for my thesis work, any and all of these results should be updated once the entirety of the Venetus A scholia are edited and made available. With all that said, it is time to turns to the data.


| Type of Scholia | Number of Scholia | Median Length in Words | Mean Length in Words | Standard Deviation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | 
| Main Scholia | 3601 | 24 | 33.78 | 31.06 |
| Intermarginal Scholia | 1220 | 6 | 7.1 | 3.97 |
| Interior Scholia | 819 | 7 | 7.66 | 5.74 |
| Interlinear Scholia | 2067 | 2 | 2.31 | 1.88 |
| Exterior Scholia | 233 | 1 | 4.19 | 28.56 |

The above chart describes the length of scholia, grouped by scholia zone. Length here is defined by the number of words in the scholia. In all these calculations, only the actual comment of the scholia was considered, so the words of the lemma were not included in the various calculations. As discussed above, the main scholia are unsurprisingly the longest scholia, with the average scholion consisting of 33.78 words, and the interlinear scholia are unsurprisingly the shortest scholia, with the average scholion consisting of 2.31 words. The main and interlinear scholia also sit at the two extremes for the values of standard deviation. The large variance for the main scholia is expected as some main scholia are as short as a few words, while others easily go on for at least one hundred words. Again, this fits the accepted view of the main scholia's function in providing space for expanded discussions of grammar, mythology, etc. as well as more clipped notes. On the other hand, the low standard deviation for the interlinear scholia (1.88), combined with its low mean number of words (2.31) confirms the mathces the expectation that the interlinear scholia are mostly used to provide short glosses on words and phrases in the *Iliad* text.

As discussed above, however, confirming that the main and interlinear scholia are definitively different from one another is not necessarily that exciting. What would be of more interest would be a significant difference between the intermarginal and interior scholia. Just based on the descriptive statistics, the two do not appear all that different. Both have a average length of about 7 words, though the interior are a bit longer on average (7.66 words on average for the interior versus 7.1 words for the intermarginal). However, the standard deviation for the two throws uncertainty over the significance of this slight difference. With a standard deviation of 5.74 for the interior and 3.97 for the intermarginal, the two sets of scholia definitely overlap in terms of scholia length. Since it is not apparent from just looking at the descriptive statistics, inferential statistics are required in order to determine if there is a statistically significant difference between the average length of the intermarginal scholia and the average length of the interior scholia.

| Types of Scholia | t-value | Statistically Significant (for p < 0.05, t > 1.96) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Main and Intermarginal | 50.35 | Statistically Significant |
| Main and Interior | 47.06 | Statistically Significant |
| Main and Interlinear | 60.61 | Statistically Significant |
| Main and Exterior | 15.24 | Statistically Significant |
| **Intermarginal and Interior** | **2.44** | **Statistically Significant** |
| Intermarginal and Interlinear | 39.56 | Statistically Significant |
| Intermarginal and Exterior | 1.55 | not statistically Significant |
| Interior and Interlinear | 26.14 | Statistically Significant |
| Interior and Exterior | 1.84 | not Statistically Significant |
| Interlinear and Exterior | 1.01 | not statistically Significant |

The above table is the result of a Welch's t-Test, which is able to compare to samples of data in order to conclude if the difference in their means are statistically significant. Since the number of scholia is so large, with the lowest occurring zones being the 233, it was assumed that there were essentially infinite degrees of freedom when conducting these tests. Unsurprsingly, given the previous discussion, the difference between the main and interlinear scholia was extremely significant, with a t-score of 60.61. In fact, all the t-tests where the main scholia were one of the sets of data were extremely statistically significant. This only reaffirms the fact already put forth by scholars that the main scholia are home to a particular set of scholia that are not found in the other zones of scholia.

To return to the intermarginal and interior scholia, a t-Test found there to be a statistically significant difference between the two's mean length as well. Thus, even without knowing anything about what the scholia actually say, one can confidently assert that there is a difference between the intermarginal and interior scholia. The difference may be slight, but it exists. At the very least, this difference suggests that there was a systematic way of placing scholia in the interior zone over the intermarginal zone. There seem to be a few plausible explanations for this. On the one hand, the scholiast could be working with a single source which supplies all of the scholia for the interior and intermarginal scholia. However, the scholiast reserves the interior scholia for only certain types of comments from the single source, while the intermarginal is reserved for other types of comments. Alternatively, the two zones of the scholia could be composed of comments arising from the same source, but one zone, the intermarginal for example, is filled up first before the scholiast moves to the interior scholia. Finally, it is altogether possible that the two different zones are composed from different sources. This multi-source theory is, perhaps, the simplest explanation in terms of trying to assess why the distribution of the scholia in the intermarginal and interior zons are so disparate. However, it is difficult with the evidence provided so far to conclude that the intermarginal and interior scholia were composed from different sources. Thus, the most one can say at this point is that there was some system to placing scholia into one zone, either the intermarginal or interior scholia, over the another. By contrast, if the two came from comments contained in a single source which were then randomly assigned to the two zones, there should not be 401 more intermarginal scholia than interior scholia - the two zones would have a more equal distribution were they randomly assigned to a zone.

As for the rest of t-tests, it is unsurprising that most of them demonstrate that there are statistically significant differences between the types of scholia. Only two of the tests could not demonstrate that the types of scholia were significantly different. However, both of the instances involved the exterior scholia, a particularly confusing zone of scholia. As the descriptive statistics demonstrate, the median length of a exterior scholion is one, but its mean is 4.19 and its standard deviation 28.56. This suggests that there are a few exterior scholia which are extremely wordy, and that these outliers are skewing the data. In fact, while at least half of the exterior scholia are just a single word, there is one exterior on folio 154v that is composed of 436 words. Such an extreme outlier is without a doubt skewing the data. So after removing this single scholia from the dataset, I re-ran the t-tests and came up with the results belows.  As predicted, the removal of the outlier scholion allowed the difference between intermarginal and exterior to become statistically significant. Thus, there should be no doubt that these two zones of scholia contains different types of comments. 

Types of Scholia|T-value|Statistically Significant (for p < 0.05, t > 1.96)
--- | --- | ---
Main and Exterior|56.92|Statistically Significant
Intermarginal and Exterior|21.25|Statistically Significant
Interior and Exterior|19.14|Statistically Significant
Interlinear and Exterior|0.11|not statistically Significant

As for the interlinear and exterior scholia, this particular test was unble to show them as being any different, and this should not be particularly exciting. Both zones of scholia mostly contain comments that consist of a single word. 82.24% of the interlinear scholia are 3 or fewer words, while a similar 84.55% of exterior scholia are 3 or fewer words. So further tests will be required to demonstrate if there is any difference amogn these zones of scholia.

Before further linguistic tests, there is one more facet of the the scholia that can be investigated without having to really read a single scholion. As stated previously, the HMT edition of the Venetus A scholia breaks a scholion into three distinct portions which is reflected in three separate `<div>` elements per scholion. One of the `<div>` elements is the comment of the scholion, the second is a URN for the line of the *Iliad* which the scholion is commenting on. The final division and element of a scholion is its lemma. Again, this "lemma" is different from the meaning of "lemma" from chapter 2. In chapter 2, "lemma" referred to the form of a word one would use to look it up in a dictionary. In terms of the structure of the Venetus A, a "lemma" is a quotation from the line which is being commented on and is included at the beginning of a scholion. Thus the lemma acts as a footnote of sorts linking a scholion with the *Iliad*. In Myriam Hecquet's discussion of the paleography of the Venetus A, she describes that the lemmata of the main scholia are written in a distinct style of handwriting, but does mention that lemmata appear in any other type of scholia (Hecquet, 79-80). Thus it is worth investigating if Hecquet's implicit conclusion has any weight to it. In other words, do zones of scholia besides the main scholia have lemmata, and if so how many? Although lemmata are only expected in the main scholia, every zone of the scholia is edited by the HMT such that if a lemma should appear it can treated wrong. Thus I could simply search the lemmata for each of the zones of scholia and see how many of those scholia atually had content in them and were not simply blank. The results are shown below:

Type of Scholia|Number of Scholia with a Lemma|Total Number of Scholia
---|---|---
Main Scholia|3456 (95.81%)|3607
IntermarginalScholia|5 (0.41%)|1223
Interior Scholia|5 (0.61%)|823
Interlinear Scholia|0 (0.00%)|2064|
Exterior Scholia|1 (0.42%)|240

Unsurprisingly, the main scholia are the zone of scholia which have the most scholia. Though such a conclusion is a bit understatement. More accurately, seeing a lemma in any of the scholia that are not the main scholia is downright rare. In the case of the interlinear scholia, there are no lemmata at all. Since there were so few lemmata on non-main scholia, it was rather simple to look into those instances where these lemmata appeared. In two instances (urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAim.hmt:11.4 and urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAim.hmt:17.17) the two intermarginal scholia appeared outside of the space typically associated with that particular zone. Intermarginal scholia usually appear in the vertical margin between the *Iliad* text and the main scholia. However the former scholion appears in the upper horizontal margin above the *Iliad* text and below the main scholia and the latter scholion appears in the lower horizontal margin below the *Iliad* text and above the main scholia. Further research would have to be done on intermarginal scholia that appear in these two margins, but it seems fair to say that their position makes them odd already. Beyond this, there is little that one can say definitively about the presence of lemmata in non-main scholia given this limited dataset. 9 out of the 11 non-main scholia with lemmata appear on pages that are extremely packed with comments in the main scholia. Thus, it is tempting to conclude that these scholia with lemmata are simply cases where the scholiast ran out of room in the main scholia zone and thus decided to record the scholia somewhere else. However, if this were true, it should also be true that whenever a manuscript page is full with main scholia, there should be some non-main scholia with lemmata. While a formal investigation into this matter has not been conducted, anecdotal evidence can substitute well enough. There are countless folios of the Venetus A which are completely filled to the brim with scholia, yet still contain no lemmata outside the main scholia. The first page of the *Iliad* text, folio 12r, serves as a prime example of this point since the nearly every margin of the page is completely filled yet there is not a single lemmata beyond the main scholia. In other words, while a formal analysis would be preferred, previous experience with the Venetus A has taught me that if there were supposed to be some link between pages with full main scholia zones and lemmata in the non-main scholia, there should be way more than 11 lemmata in the main scholia.

To add to this argument that these scholia are not simply main scholia located in a non-main zone, none of the lemmata observed in the non-main zone are written in that same semi-uncial handwriting which Hecquet noted is a strong characteristic of the main scholia (Hecquet, 79). If there is any common thread among some of the scholia observed in non-main scholia, it is that four of five the lemmata seen in the interior scholia occur within a span of 26 lines from Book 2.194-219. Beyond a suggestion that at one time a source for commentary on Book 2 that included lemmata was used to create the interior scholia in Book 2, there is little else to say. 

Ultimately, these observations confirms expectations about the purpose of the lemmata in the Venetus A. An overwhelming majority of main scholia (95%) use lemmata, most likely since their distance from the text requires some method of aligning scholion to *Iliad* line. By contrast, intermarginal, interior, and interlinear can all be placed as close to the *Iliad* line as possible, both because of the positioning of their "zone" on the manuscript page, but also because the average scholion is much shorter than that of the main scholia, so it is easier to pack them closer together near the lines. In the case of the interlinear scholia, their comments are so short, it easy for the scribe to place the comment directly above the word of interest. As for the exterior scholia, it clear that the proximity argument does not work. However, given the relative sparsity of exterior scholia (233 in the entire manuscript) and, generally, their brevity (a median of 1 word) it is easy for the scholiasts to align their exterior scholion content so that it is on the same horizontal plane as the line it is commenting on. Thus, in all four cases, lemmata are not necessary for their function, thus it is unsurprising that they show up so few times, if at all.

With the larger, more general forms of text analysis accomplised, there can begin a movement into the actual text of the scholia. One of the first analyses that was conducted was what kind of discourse does the scholiast use in the different zones of the scholia. By "kind of discourse," I am referring to whether the words being written as a quotation from the *Iliad* or any other source, or whether the words of a particular scholion are written in a "direct voice." Words in direct voice appear as if they are coming from the scholiast's own mind, even if many of these direct voice words are merely copying the words of a previous scholia. Thus the distinction between direct and indirect language bolils down to whether a word can be obviously identified as having to have appeared in another source. So if a string of words is explicitly attributed to another scholar, that string of words is considered indirect discourse. Additionally, indirect discourse is recognized in examples where a word does not fit within the syntax of the sentence. In the following English sentence, the word "running" would be considered indirect discourse by this logic: My favorite word is "running". "Running" is not part of the sentence's verb, nor is it being used as a gerund. Here, "running" is simply being used as an abstract word, and its typical English associations do not fit within the context of the sentence. In other words, "running" would be considered indirect discourse.

In order to analyze the types of discourse within the scholia, this would have to have been marked-up ahead of time, and indeed the HMT editions of the scholia use TEI notation to demarcate two types of discouse in the scholia: direct and indirect discourse. Direct discouse refers to words that appear to come directly from the scribe himself. So, for example, the main scholion to first line of the *Iliad* wonders why the poems begins as it does. It reads, "They question why [the poet] started in this way from the wrath [and] from the ill-omened name (ζητοῦσι δια τί ἀπὸ τῆς μήνιδος ἤρξατο οὕτως δυσφήμου ὀνόματος, urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:1.1.comment). While the scribe of the Venetus A may be simply copying this sentence from a previous scholiast, but there is no indication given that this sentence comes from any other source than the scribe himself. Thus it is considered direct discourse. By contrast, indirect discourse are words that are obviously derived from a source other than the scribe's own mind. These include cited quotations from the *Iliad*, Greek tragedy, other ancient scholars, etc. Any time, the text can definitively attributed to a different source, it is indirect discouse. Regardless of the specific type of indirect dscouse, all words written in indirect discourse are marked up in the Homer Multitext's edition with the TEI element `<q>`. Thus, it is rather simple to identify what words are written in direct or indirect discourse. Below is the distribution of the two types of discouse by zone of scholia. It should be noted that scholia from Book 3 and 6 were excluded from this analysis since these two books were edited at a time in the HMT which did same editoral standards as those today.

| Scholia Type  | Words in Indirect Discouse | Words in Direct Discouse | Total Words |
|---|---|---|---|
|Main Scholia|12537 (10.34%)|108689 (89.66%)|121226|
|Intermarginal Scholia|1241 (15.19%)|6929 (84.81%)|8170|
|Interior Scholia|641 (10.68%)|5361 (89.32%)|6002|
|Interlinear Scholia|45 (0.94%)|4755 (99.06%)|4800
|Exterior Scholia|52 (11.16%)|414 (88.84%)|466|

There are number of things to say about the data above, but what is most clear is that direct voice is, by far the most pervasive type of discourse for each of the types of scholia. This is especially true of the interlinear scholia, 99% of whose words are written in direct discourse. Again, this is consistent with the common usage of the interlinear scholia to provide a Byzantine gloss on the *Iliad* text. According to HMT editorial conventions, these interlinear glosses are considered "direct discourse" thus the high percentage of direct discourse is not surprising.

What is perhaps surprising is the similarity in the distribution of the types of discourse among the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia. As mentioned previously, prior scholarship has furthered some theories about the relationship between these three zones of the scholia, including the idea that many intermarginal scholia are summaries of longer main scholia. Here, however, it appears there is a definitive difference between the distribution of direct and indirect discourse between the intermarginal scholia and the other two zones. In fact, running a Z-score test on proportions revealed that the intermarginal scholia had a significantly different distribution of the discourse from both the main and interior scholia. In order for a difference to statistically different, the probababiliity of the the two datasets being the same needs to be less than 5%, which occurs when there is a Z-score greater than 1.96. The data is displayed in the table below.

Zones Being Compared|Z-Score|Significance (p < 0.05)
---|---|---
intermarginal & main|13.76|Statisically Significant
intermarginal & interior|	7.39|Statisically Significant
main & interior|1.43|Not Statistically Significant

While this particuarly dataset shows that the distribution of direct and indirect discourse to be essentially for the main and interior scholia, one should not conclude that these two zones have identical content. This dataset says nothing about definitive about the content of scholia, just the systematic use of language in the two zones.

Furthermore, it worth looking into the further classification of indirect discouse into two distinct categories: quoted text and quoted language. Quoted text refers to words that can be directly attributed to a text outside of the *Iliad* line a scholion is commenting on. So if a scholion is quoting a passage from the *Odyssey*, from Greek tragedy, or a passage from a different book of the *Iliad*, that quote is considered quoted text. Quoted language, on the other hand, refers to words that either exist in the *Iliad* line that the scholion is commenting on, or instances where the scholiast is using a word to refer to the word in its abstract form. Very often this abstract use of language usage occurs when the scholiast is discussing the morphology or etymology of a word. For example, a main scholion to line 182 of book 18 of the *Iliad* reads, "Just as "τίθεσθαι" is the infinitive form associated with "τίθενται", in this way "δίεσθαι" is the infinitve form associated with "δίενται" (ὥσπερ οὖν παρα τὸ τίθενται ἐστιν  ἀπαρέμφατον τίθεσθαι· οὕτως καὶ παρα τὸ δίενται τὸ δίεσθαι, urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:18.62). Translating the scholion into English helps to make clear what sorts of words are examples of language usage, since legitimate language usages words should not be translated. The scholion is using the word to refer to the word in abstract, not what the word means. 

While both types of indirect discourse are set apart by the TEI element for a quote `<q>`, quoted text has additonal mark-up to allow for a URN citation of where the quote is coming from. Given these mark-up conventions, the table below details the distribution of the two types of indirect discourse by each zone of the scholia. 


Type Of Scholia|Words in Quoted Text|Words in Quoted Language|Total Words in Indirect Discourse
---|---|---|---
Main|6383.(52.67%)|5737 (47.33%)|12120
Intermarginal|88 (7.4%)|1101 (92.6%)|1189
Interior|53 (8.44%)|575 (91.56%)|628
Interlinear|4 (8.89%)|41 (91.11%)|45
Exterior|	0 (0.0%)|52 (100.0%)|52
Non-Main |145 (7.58%)|1769.0 (92.42%)|1914

The most striking detail of the above table is how the main scholia are the only zone of the scholia to utilize quoted text to any meaningful degree, with 53% of the words in indirect discourse relating being a quoted text word. By contrast, quoted text comprises only about 7% to 9% of the indirect discourse words for intermarginal, interior, and interlinear scholia, and none of the indirect discourse for the exterior scholia. When a Z-score test for proportions was run on this dataset, all of the non-main scholia were combined into a single datapoint, and this is represented in table above with the row labeled "Non-Main". Comparing distribution of quoted text and quoted language words between the main and non-main scholia resulted in a Z-score of 36.75. To repeat, in order to achieve be a statistically significant difference, the Z-score must be aboe 1.96, which corresponds to there being a less than 5% chance that the two datasets are the same. A Z-score of 36.75 corresponds with there being a less than 0.001% chance of the two datsets being identical. Thus, it can be stated with great confidence that the distribution of words within indirect discourse differs significantly between the main scholia and the non-main scholia.

Practically, this difference suggests that quoting an text beyond the line of the *Iliad* being commented on is something with much more frequency with the main scholia than any othe zone of the scholia. It was already shown by comparing the distribution of direct and indirect discourse that the main and intermarginal scholia differ significantly in their use of language, and this dataset only strengthens this conclusion as the two zones are again shown to use langauge differently, with quoted text comprising a far greater percentage of words in indirect discourse. However, the distribution of direct and indirect discourse did not show any significant difference main and interior scholia. This might lead someone to conclude that these two zones are fairly closely related since if the use language in similar ways, they might derive from the same, or at least, similar source. However, the distribution of words in indirect discourse dispels any such conclusions. The interior zone's distribution of quoted text and language differed as significantly from the main scholia as the intermarginal scholia did. 

In fact, a Z-score test for proportions found no significant difference in the distribution of quoted text and quoted language between interior and intermarginal scholia (Z-score: 0.79). This detail complicates the relationship between the intermarginal and interior as, according to this metric, the two appear to come from a similar source, or at least from sources which have identical distributions of quoted text and quoted language. However, one cannot case aside the observation that the intermarginal and interior scholia have a statistically significant difference in the distribution of words in direct and indirect discourse. The firmest conclusion that can be made is that the intermarginal and interior scholia's difference in distribution of direct and indirect language, though similar in terms of its distribution of quoted text and language, ensure that the two zones of the scholia cannot be treated identically, and the difference is most likely reflective of their coming from separate sources.

In sum, he different types of discourse employed in the five scholia zones, particularly the differences observed among the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia, further the argument begun by their differences in length of scholia in words, that the five zones should be treated as five distinct zones. There has been no strong evidence thus far to suggest that treating the scholia zones as anything other than separate texts is a valid way of approaching the Venetus A. However, it should be conceded that neither length of scholia no type of discourse says anything about the content of the scholia. It is entirely possible that the zones of the scholia talk about the exact same content, but are merely presented in different types of language that are reflected in the difference in discourse across the fie zones. What is required is some way to study systematically the content of the five zones of the scholia.

One rather simple method for assessing content is to look at what names appear most frequently in each of the five zones of the scholia. Named entities can give a deal of insight into the content and purpose of various scholia. If a scholion abounds in in characters from characters from the *Iliad*, for example this might mean that the scholia is explaining a particular plot point, mythology, or is dealing with quotes from the text. On the other hand, if a scholion is full of famous ancient grammarians, that gives the reader a clue that grammar is that sholion's focus. To start off this analysis, the table below presents total number instances of a name appearing compared to the total number of words in each scholia zone.

Scholia Zone|Frequency of any name|Words in scholia zone|Ratio of all names to all words
---|---|---|---
Main|3951|112206|3.52%
Intermarginal|401|7763|5.17%
Interior|236|5678|4.16%
Interlinear|56|4658|1.2%
Exterior|27|963|2.8%

This beginning analysis is, again, more focused on the language and composition of the various zones than interested in the content, per se. Were a particular zone to have a very large proportion of personal names, one would assume that it served a fundamentally different purpose than one which contained nearly no personal names. This dataset contains no such clear cut difference when looking at the proportions. Particularly, among the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia there is a difference of, at most 1.5%. A Z-test for proportions, however, reveals that the difference among all three zones is indeed significant.

Scholia Zones|Z-score|Significance (p < 0.05)
---|---|---
main & im|7.49|Statisically Significant
main & int|2.52|Statisically Significant
im & int|2.72|Statisically Significant

Although there is a statisitically significant difference, it is worth noting that this difference, which is only 0.64% between the main and interior zone, may not practically significant, in isolation. However, within the content of the rest of the data presented up to this point, it acts as further support for the argument that these three zones differ in fundamental compositional aspects and should not be treated as coming from the same source.

However, as mentioned, the focus has shifted away from compositional aspects and towards content. Additionally, from here on out, datawill often be provided on the interlinear and exterior scholia, but the main, intermarginal, interior zones will be the primary focus of any analyses. This is because even a cursory reading of the manuscipt will show that these three zones, provide the commentary on the *Iliad*. Interlinear and exterior scholia are usually no more than a word or two in length, and thus, by nature of their extreme brevity canot provide commentary comparable to the other three zones.  

Full histograms of the most commonly appearing for the [main](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/mainScholiaHistogram.tsv), [intermarginal](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/imScholiaHistogram.tsv), and [interior](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/intScholiaHistogram.tsv) scholia are available in my thesis github page. In all three zones, the Alexandrian editor Aristarchus is most frequently occuring name and in all three zones Zenodotus comes in as the second most frequent. After this initial unity, however, the three begin to diverge considerably. In the main scholia, there are 19 names which comprise at least 1% of the total name appearances in the main scholia. By contrast, there are only 6 names in the intermarginal scholia which  appear with a frequency of at least 1% and only 10 in the interior scholia.

name|Occurrences of Name in Main Scholia|Percentage of Names against Total Names Mentioned
---|---|---
Aristarchus|300|7.59%
|Zenodotus|285|7.21%
|Zeus|204|5.16%
|Homer|148|3.75%
|Achilles|129|3.26%
|Hector|77|1.95%
|Agamemnon|74|1.87%|
|Aristophanes|70|1.77%|
|Patroclus|64|1.62%|
|Odysseus|62|1.57%|
|Hera|62|1.57%|
|Athena|57|1.44%|
|"Ptolemy of Ascalon"|46|1.16%|
|Ajax|46|1.16%|
|Nestor|46|1.16%
|Heracles|45|1.14%
|Poseidon|41|1.04%|
|Diomedes|40|1.01%|
|Apollo|40|1.01%|

|name|Occurrences of Name in Intermarginal Scholia|Percentage of Name against Total Names Mentioned| Nummber of Words in Scholia Type
---|---|---
|Aristarchus|209|52.12%|
|Zenodotus|73|18.2%|
|Aristophanes|36|8.98%|
|Herodianus|7|1.75%
|Homer|5|1.25%|
|Agamemnon|5|1.25%|
