The data tables included here lsit every personal name which appears within each zone of the zone. So the file [mainScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/mainScholiaHistogram.tsv) is a table containing every single name mentioned within all the main scholia of this data set. [imScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/imScholiaHistogram.tsv) presents the same data but for the intermarginal scholia, [intScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/intScholiaHistogram.tsv) for the interior scholia, and so on.

These tables all have 5 columns in total. The first two columns of every table contain the identifiers associated with each name. So the first column contains the unique urn identifier associated with a specific name, which is then listed in the second column. So, for example, if the name "Achilles" were to show up in any main scholion, the row listing "Achillies" would have its first column contain the urn for Achilles (urn:cite:hmt:pers.pers1), and then the second row would have the name (Achilles). 

The other three columns associated with each row give information about how frequently that name occurs within that type of scholia. The third column simply presents how many times a given names appears throughout a specific type of scholia. So in [mainScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/mainScholiaHistogram.tsv), the third column presents how many times a specific name appears in all the main scholia. The fourth column presents how frequently a name appears in a certain type of scholion compared to all the other personal names in that type of scholia. So, for example, in [mainScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/mainScholiaHistogram.tsv), the fourth column for the row associated with Achilles presents a percentage of 3.26%. This means that 3.26% of the personal names mentioned in the main scholia were Achilles. Finally, the fifth column presents how frequently a name appears compared to all of the words within a certain type of scholia. So in [mainScholiaHistogram.tsv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData/HistogramsOfScholiaTypes/mainScholiaHistogram.tsv), the name "Achilles" constituted 0.11% of all the words within all the main scholia.
