## Data for Chapters 3 & 4

The data for chapter three are the result of applying the concept of distant reading discussed in [Chapter 2](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/ThesisWriting/Chapter2.md). There were five primary lines of inquiry made using distant reading which were employed to explore differences between the various zones of the scholia (that is, the main, intermarginal, interior, interlinear, and exterior zones). However, in chapter four I used most of these same lines of inquiry in order to examine further the relationship of the intermarginal and interior scholia and whether this intermarginal-interior model or the start-of-line/end-of-line model was a more accurate representation of the scribes' original intentions in creating the Venetus A. Thus I combined the datatables for chapters three and four since there was already so much overlap.

The first line of inquiry was a look into just how each of the zones of the scholia differed in terms of length, as measured by the number of words per scholion. I also examined this line of inquiry for the start-of-line and end-of-line scholia. The data for this line of inquiry can be found in the [ScholiaLengthData folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/ScholiaLengthData).

The second inquiry was into how often a scholion began with a lemma, or quotation of the *Iliad* intended to help a reader know on which part of the text the scholion is commenting. This data can be found in the [LemmataData folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/LemmataData).

Next was the inquiry into the type of language used in the scholia. Namely, whether the individual words of a scholion were written in scribal voice or were quotations from another text or some other use of language that is clearly not scribal voice. If a word were being quoted in order to discuss its etymology, for example, it would be categorized as quoted language, and not part of scribal. I also examined this line of inquiry for the start-of-line and end-of-line scholia. A fuller explanation of scribal and non-scribal voice can be found in chapter 3, but data related to scribal and non-scribal voice can be found in the [VoiceTypeData folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/VoiceTypeData).

Then a first attempt was made into investigating the differences in content among the various zones of the scholia by looking into the differences in the appearances of various names throughout the scholia. Data related to the frequency of names can be found in the [NameData folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/NameData).

Finally, the [TopicModelData folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapter3/Data/TopicModelData) contains all the data related to the use of the ToPan topic-modelling software to analyze the patterns of language inherent to the scholia. I also used topic modelling in my investigation of the competing intermarginal/interior and start-of-line/end-of-line models.

Outside of these lines inquiry there is also the [StartEndIdentification folder](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/tree/master/Appendix/Chapters3%264/Data/StartEndIdentification). In order to do any inquiry into whether the intermarginal/interior model was more accurate than the start-of-line/end-of-line model, I first needed to classify each of the scholia in my samply as either start-of-line or end-of-line. The data required for the process and the results of this process are found in this process.

The last piece of data relevant to these two chapters is the file [FrequencyofScholia.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapters3%264/Data/FrequencyofScholia.csv). This simply presents what proportion of the total number of scholia fall into one of the five major zones of the scholia (main, intermarginal, interior, interlinear, and exterior).

