Here are located the various tables for data associated with quantifying the number of scholia which begin with a lemma.

The first file of note is [nonMainLemmataUrns.txt](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapter/Data/LemmataData/nonMainLemmataUrns.txt). This is just a plain text file listing all of the scholia (by their URN identifiers) which begin with a lemma but are not part of the main scholia. These scholia are grouped by the type of scholia (interior, intermarginal, etc.)

The next file of note is [lemmataTextIliadLines.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapters3%264/Data/LemmataData/lemmataTextIliadLines.csv). The purpose of this table is to assess the legitimacy of the lemmata which begin the scholia compiled in nonMainLemmataUrns.txt. It is a five-column table. The first column contains that URN citation for one of the scholia compiled in nonMainLemmataUrns.txt. The second column contains the Greek text of each of the scholia's supposed lemmata. The third column contain the URN citation for the line of the Iliad each scholia is commenting on. The fourth column presents whether the lemmata for that scholion is legitimate or not, and the final fifth column presents my notes as to why I considered each of the lemmata as legitimate or not.

The final file of note is [lemmaFreq.csv](https://github.com/cjschu17/Thesis2016-2017/blob/master/Appendix/Chapters3%264/Data/LemmataData/lemmaFreq.csv). This is a four-column table which presents how prevalent lemmata are within each type of scholia. The first column presents the type of scholia to which each row of data will pertain (main, intermarginal, etc.). The second column presents the number of total scholia of each type, while the third column presents the number of scholia within each type to begin with a lemma. The final column presents the percentage of scholia within each type of scholia to begin with a lemma. The data for this file has been adjusted from the raw data according to what was determined to be a legitimate or illegitimate lemma according to lemmataTextIliadLines.csv.
